# OPEV #0015: Expansion of the Vulnerability Field

During the development of the initial implementations, there have been issues
raised about the need to expand the vulnerability field. While this OPEV only
addresses the need to expand the vulnerability field 1) become an object and to
2) to express more names or aliases of a vulnerability, members of the community
[have pointed to other cases](https://github.com/openvex/spec/issues/31) where
the vulnerability entry needs to be expanded from an identifier string to a full
struct.

## Issues Addressed by thie OPEV:

This proposal addesses a breaking change to allow for current proposals and
allow room for growth for future enhancements. Specifically, this proposal 
provides a fix for the following issue:

* [Allow for vulnerability to be a list](https://github.com/openvex/spec/issues/12)

## Enhancement Proposal

The current entry for a vulnerability in a VEX statement is only a string
capturing the identifier string. This proposal suggests expanding the 
vulnerability entry to become an object and allow a list of aliases. 

```json
{
  "@context": "https://openvex.dev/ns",
  "@id": "https://openvex.dev/docs/public/vex-6e8cc8c4d0c38e9e9a60949e5dc0279684d8ad5f6711d9a12bb52247b6cc7271",
  "author": "mailto:john@doe.com",,
  "timestamp": "2023-01-16T20:41:55.708329108-06:00",
  "statements": [
    {
      "vulnerability": {
        "@id": "https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2019-17571",
        "name": "CVE-2019-17571", 
        "aliases": [
            "GHSA-2qrg-x229-3v8q",
            "openSUSE-SU-2020:0051-1",
            "SNYK-RHEL7-LOG4J-1472071",
            "DSA-4686-1",
            "USN-4495",
            "DLA-2065-1",
        ],
      },
      "timestamp": "2022-10-11T20:29:19Z",
      "products": [
        "pkg:oci/miniprow@sha256:74634d9736a45ca9f6e1187e783492199e020f4a5c19d0b1abc2b604f894ac99"
      ],
      "subcomponents": [
        "pkg:apk/wolfi/glibc@2.36-r4",
        "pkg:apk/wolfi/glibc-locale-posix@2.36-r4"
      ],
      "status": "fixed"
    }
  ]
}
```

With this change, the main identifier of the vulnerability entry in the statement
now becomes the `@id`'s IRI. A new field is introduced as to capture the main
vulnerability name and aditional labels identifying the vulnerability in external
tracking systems can be listed under "aliases".

This change introduces a new Vulnerability context native to OpenVEX. As a linked 
JSON-ld document, the IRI may point to an element in an external document (for
example a Vulnerability in an SPDX security document) and still complete the VEX
statement:

```json
{
  "@context": "https://openvex.dev/ns",
  "@id": "https://openvex.dev/docs/public/vex-6e8cc8c4d0c38e9e9a60949e5dc0279684d8ad5f6711d9a12bb52247b6cc7271",
  "author": "mailto:john@doe.com",,
  "timestamp": "2023-01-16T20:41:55.708329108-06:00",
  "statements": [
    {
      "vulnerability": {
        "@context": {
          "spdx": "https://www.spdx.org/ontology/spdx3.jsonld"
        },
        "@id": "https://spdx.org/spdxdocs/apko/da7945a1-f44d-4d73-afd5-02b183eb65c2#CVE-2014-123456",
        "@type": "spdx:Vulnerability",
      },
      "timestamp": "2022-10-11T20:29:19Z",
      "products": [
        "pkg:oci/miniprow@sha256:74634d9736a45ca9f6e1187e783492199e020f4a5c19d0b1abc2b604f894ac99"
      ],
      "subcomponents": [
        "pkg:apk/wolfi/glibc@2.36-r4",
        "pkg:apk/wolfi/glibc-locale-posix@2.36-r4"
      ],
      "status": "fixed"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Full Spec and New Fields

The new vulnerability object modifies the field from its original string format.
The new object defines two fields beyond the JSON-ld implicit fields: name and aliases.

#### `name`

The name field captures the main vulnerability label or identifier string as used
in external tracking systems and databases. It supplements the optional IRI in the
`@id` field as this field can be an arbitrary string that can be reused  throughout
the document.

#### `aliases`

The `aliases` field is a list of labels that identify the vulnerability in 
databases and tracking systems. OpenVEX does not make any asumptions on the
validity of the labels. While some of them may be well known (eg CVE, RHSA, GHSA,
etc) the spec also allows for labels from unknown or private tracking systems.

Just as with products and subcomponents, a VEX statement should strive for as
much descriptive breadth as possible when naming vulnerabilities. The easier
to match the VEX document's data with a vulnerability's entry in a database the
more useful the document becomes.
